Document `LET` (#1207)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/clauses/let.adoc

= LET
:description: Information about Cypher's `LET` clause.
:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-2025.04

`LET` binds expressions to variables.
For queries involving several chained expressions, it can be a more succinct and readable alternative to xref:clauses/with.adoc[`WITH`].

> Unlike `WITH`, `LET` cannot limit the scope of variables available to subsequent clauses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `WITH`, `LET` does not remove variables from the scope for subsequent clauses.
```

I feel this sound more positive ... "it does not limit" is somehow slightly negatively connotated for me, while "it does not remove" is somehow slightly negatively connotated for me. ... may that is just me.

       (amir)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-10-09')}]->(laptop),
       (amir)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-01-10')}]->(chocolate),
       (keisha)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-07-09')}]->(headphones),
       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-03-05')}]->(chocolate),
       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-03-05')}]->(coffee),
       (mateo)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-04-11')}]->(laptop),
       (hannah)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-12-11')}]->(coffee),
       (hannah)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-06-02')}]->(headphones),
       (leila)-[:BUYS {date: date('2023-05-17')}]->(laptop),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-02-27')}]->(phone),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-08-23')}]->(headphones),
       (niko)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-12-24')}]->(coffee),
       (yusuf)-[:BUYS {date: date('2024-12-24')}]->(chocolate),
       (yusuf)-[:BUYS {date: date('2025-01-02')}]->(laptop),
        
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(laptop),
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(phone),
       (techCorp)-[:SUPPLIES]->(headphones),
       (foodies)-[:SUPPLIES]->(chocolate),
       (foodies)-[:SUPPLIES]->(coffee)
----

[[assigning-expressions-to-variables]]

> == Assigning expressions to a variable

Reviewer: Cf. Comment on the index page. (Also the plural doesn't fit, because it is one expression per variable. That one expression may be evaluated to multiple values.)

Here is another proposal:
```suggestion
== Assigning values to a variable
```

> Both `Let` and `WITH` can be used to assign variables to an expression:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both `LET` and `WITH` can be used to assign variables to an expression:
```

* `LET` syntax: `LET <variable> = <expression>, <variable> = <expression>`

> * `WITH` syntax: `WITH <expression> AS <variable>, <expression> AS <variable>`

Reviewer: This may make look like they do the same, which they do not. As explained at the top and in the next section ("Variables in scope: comparing `LET` and `WITH`"). So, I wonder if we need that here.

May we make this section just about LET and do not mention WITH at all. It is mentioned enough at the top and in the next section.

----
======
=====

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer", cols="1*<m"]
|===
| fullName

| "Amir Rahman"
| "Keisha Nguyen"
| "Mateo Ortega"
| "Hannah Connor"
| "Leila Haddad"
| "Niko Petrov"
| "Yusuf Abdi"

1+d|Rows: 7

|===

.Using `LET` to bind several variables
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (s:Supplier)-[:SUPPLIES]->(p:Product)
LET supplier = s.name, product = p.name
RETURN supplier, product
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer", cols="2*<m"]
|===
| supplier | product

| "TechCorp" | "Laptop"
| "TechCorp" | "Phone"
| "TechCorp" | "Headphones"
| "Foodies Inc." | "Chocolate"
| "Foodies Inc." | "Coffee"

2+d|Rows: 4
|===

[[let-and-with-differences]]
== Differences between `LET` and `WITH`

There are important differences between `LET` and `WITH` that can be divided into the following categories:

* xref:clauses/let.adoc#variable-scope[Variables in scope]
* xref:clauses/let.adoc#chaining-expressions[Chaining expressions]
* xref:clauses/let.adoc#aggregations-distinct[Aggregations and `DISTINCT`]

[[variable-scope]]
=== Variables in scope

`LET` and `WITH` behave differently in terms of what variables remain in scope for subsequent clauses.

> Unlike `WITH`, `LET` cannot drop variables from the scope of subsequent clauses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `WITH`, `LET` does not drop variables from the scope of subsequent clauses.
```

cf. above. I like this version with "drop" over my own suggestion from above.

Or more `LET`-oriented:
```suggestion
`LET` does not drop variables from the scope of subsequent clauses, while `WITH` does.
```
(or the other way around).

We should pay attention that the page works for someone who is not familiar with `WITH`.

.Variables in scope: comparing `LET` and `WITH`
=====

Any variable not explicitly referenced by `WITH` (or carried over by `WITH *`) is dropped from the scope of subsequent clauses.

.Not allowed -- Referencing a variable dropped by `WITH`
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
MATCH (s:Supplier)-[:SUPPLIES]->(p:Product)
WITH s.name AS supplier
RETURN supplier, p.name AS product
----

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Variable `p` not defined
----

`LET`, however, cannot regulate which variables are in scope.
Replacing `WITH` with `LET` in the above query would, therefore, return results.

.`LET` does not drop variables
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (s:Supplier)-[:SUPPLIES]->(p:Product)
LET supplier =  s.name
RETURN supplier, p.name AS product
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer", cols="2*<m"]
|===
| supplier | product

| "TechCorp" | "Laptop"
| "TechCorp" | "Phone"
| "TechCorp" | "Headphones"
| "Foodies Inc." | "Chocolate"
| "Foodies Inc." | "Coffee"

2+d|Rows: 5

|===

=====

[[chaining-expressions]]
=== Chaining expressions

> The fact that `LET` does not drop variables means that it can be used to chain expressions in a clear and concise manner, where variables bound in one `LET` clause can be referenced by subsequent clauses.

Reviewer: 🎉

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product)
WITH p, p.price >= 500 AS isExpensive
WITH p, isExpensive, NOT isExpensive AS isAffordable
WITH p, isExpensive, isAffordable, 
     CASE 
         WHEN isExpensive THEN 'High-end' 
         ELSE 'Budget' 
     END AS discountCategory
RETURN p.name AS product, p.price AS price, isAffordable, discountCategory
ORDER BY price
----

=====

[[aggregations-distinct]]
=== Aggregations and `DISTINCT`

Unlike `WITH`, `LET` cannot perform aggregations or be combined with `DISTINCT`.
For example, in the following query, `WITH` could not be replaced by `LET`:

.Combining `WITH DISTINCT` and aggregations on expressions
[source, source]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product)
WITH DISTINCT c, sum(p.price) AS totalSpent
RETURN c.firstName AS customer, totalSpent
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer", cols="2*<m"]
|===
| customer | totalSpent

| "Amir" | 1005
| "Keisha" | 250
| "Mateo" | 1015
| "Hannah" | 260
| "Leila" | 1000
| "Niko" | 760
| "Yusuf" | 1005

2+d|Rows: 7
|===

.Combining `WITH` and `LET`
[source, source]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product)
WITH DISTINCT c, sum(p.price) AS totalSpent

> LET fullName = c.firstName + ' ' + c.lastName,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LET fullName = c.firstName + ' ' + c.lastName
```
